br: add metrics description for snapshot restore and PITR (#18516)
pingcap/docs: grafana-tikv-dashboard.md

- Initial Scanning Trigger Reason: The reason for triggering incremental scanning
- Region Checkpoint Key Putting: The number of checkpoint operations logged to the PD

> ### Import & Snapshot restore

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Backup & Import
```
Please keep it consistent with the dashboard on Grafana
For v8.1.0 clusters, the dashboard is `Backup & Import`
<img width="297" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/90d309a7-db8e-4cdb-bddb-381165795d25">

Author: right, I guess it makes sense to change the dashboard first and later update the doc. I plan to rename the dashboard to be more explicit on restore vs import.

Author: well actually it already had a `backup` section in this doc that does not match any existing dashboard sections, I was adding the restore/import part of that.  let me know if think we still should add `backup` here

> - Import CPU Utilization: CPU utilization aggregated by sst importer.
> - Import Thread Count: number of threads used by sst importer.
> - Import Errors: error counts during sst import.
> - Import RPC Duration: time spent for various RPC calls in sst importer.
> - Import RPC Ops: number of total RPC calls in sst importer.
> - Import RPC Count: number of inflight RPC calls in sst importer.
> - Import Write/Download RPC Duration: RPC time for write/download in sst importer.
> - Import Wait Duration: time spent on downloading task waiting in queue for execution.
> - Import Read SST Duration: time spent on reading from external storage of a file and download it to TiKV.
> - Import Rewrite SST Duration: time spent on rewriting SST based on rewrite rules. 
> - Import Ingest RPC Duration: time spent on handling ingest RPC request on TiKV.
> - Import Ingest SST Duration: time spent on ingesting SST into RocksDB.
> - Import Ingest SST Bytes: number of bytes ingested.
> - Import Download SST Throughput: SST download throughput in bytes per second.
> - cloud request: number of request to cloud providers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Import CPU Utilization: The CPU utilization aggregated by SST importer.
- Import Thread Count: The number of threads used by SST importer.
- Import Errors: The number of errors encountered during SST import.
- Import RPC Duration: The time spent on various RPC calls in SST importer.
- Import RPC Ops: The total number of RPC calls in SST importer.
- Import RPC Count: The number of in-flight RPC calls in SST importer.
- Import Write/Download RPC Duration: The RPC time for write or download operations in SST importer.
- Import Wait Duration: The time spent waiting in queue for download task execution.
- Import Read SST Duration: The time spent reading a file from external storage and downloading it to TiKV.
- Import Rewrite SST Duration: The time spent rewriting SST based on rewrite rules.
- Import Ingest RPC Duration: The time spent handling ingest RPC requests on TiKV.
- Import Ingest SST Duration: The time spent ingesting SST into RocksDB.
- Import Ingest SST Bytes: The number of bytes ingested.
- Import Download SST Throughput: The SST download throughput in bytes per second.
- cloud request: The number of requests to cloud providers.
```

> ### Point-in-Time Restore

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Point In Time Restore
```
Please keep it consistent with the dashboard on Grafana

> - CPU Usage: CPU utilization by PITR.
> - P99 RPC Duration: 99 percentile of the RPC requests time.
> - Import RPC Ops: number of total RPC calls in sst importer.
> - Import RPC Count: number of inflight RPC calls in sst importer.
> - Cache Events: number of events on file cache during sst import.
> - Overall RPC Duration: time spent on RPC calls.
> - Read File into Memory Duration: time spent on downloading files from external storage and loaded in to memory.
> - Queuing Time: time spent on waiting to get scheduled on a thread.
> - Apply Request Throughput: Apply request rate in bytes.
> - Downloaded File Size: downloaded file size in bytes.
> - Apply Batch Size: number of bytes for applying to Raft store in one batch. 
> - Blocked by Concurrency Time: time spent on waiting to get executed due to concurrency constraint.  
> - Apply Request Speed: speed of applying request to Raft store. 
> - Cached File in Memory: files cached by the applying requests of importer.
> - Engine Requests Unfinished: number of pending requests to Raft store.
> - Apply Time: time spent on writing data to the Raft store.
> - Raft Store Memory Usage: memory usage for Raft store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- CPU Usage: The CPU utilization by point-in-time recovery (PITR).
- P99 RPC Duration: The 99th percentile of RPC request time.
- Import RPC Ops: The total number of RPC calls in SST importer.
- Import RPC Count: The number of inf-light RPC calls in SST importer.
- Cache Events: The number of events on file cache during SST import.
- Overall RPC Duration: The time spent on RPC calls.
- Read File into Memory Duration: The time spent downloading files from external storage and loading them into memory.
- Queuing Time: The time spent waiting to be scheduled on a thread.
- Apply Request Throughput: The rate of applying requests in bytes.
- Downloaded File Size: The size of downloaded file in bytes.
- Apply Batch Size: The number of bytes for applying to Raft store in one batch.
- Blocked by Concurrency Time: The time spent waiting for execution due to concurrency constraints.
- Apply Request Speed: The speed of applying request to Raft store.
- Cached File in Memory: The files cached by the applying requests of importer.
- Engine Requests Unfinished: The number of pending requests to Raft store.
- Apply Time: The time spent writing data to the Raft store.
- Raft Store Memory Usage: The memory usage for Raft store.
```

Author: Thanks for the change! Somehow I don't have the permission to commit from web UI, can only do it offline from my local change

> > **Note:**

Reviewer: @Tristan1900 @BornChanger Could you please help confirm whether the following metrics belong to **Point-in-Time Restore** or **Log Backup**?

https://github.com/pingcap/docs/blob/2528780e489208714173f8ab0e56c1e1082cc6b6/grafana-tikv-dashboard.md?plain=1#L525-L534

Author: ah good catch, it should be log backup, I thought it was a note for the entire dashboard.

- Initial Scanning Trigger Reason: The reason for triggering incremental scanning
- Region Checkpoint Key Putting: The number of checkpoint operations logged to the PD

> ### Snapshot restore 

Reviewer 2: most are for import, why call it `Snapshot restore`

Author: The purpose of this PR is to add metrics description for restore, as a new member in the team I find it myself confused when looking at sst importer where it's actually used by restore. I feel like customer might have the same doubt when looking the metrics, so changing the name to be snapshot restore.

I have brought up to the team that we probably should have an abstraction of the restore on the TiKV path, where internally it still calls sst importer. It can be more explicit and meaningful to users this way, and inside of it we can rename or create new metrics to be decoupled with sst importer.

let me know if that makes sense!

Reviewer 2: lgtm

> ### Snapshot restore 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Import & Snapshot restore
```

Author: good call, thanks!

- Import CPU Utilization: CPU utilization aggregated by sst importer.
- Import Thread Count: number of threads used by sst importer.
- Import Errors: error counts during sst import.
- Import RPC Duration: time spent for various RPC calls in sst importer.
- Import RPC Ops: number of total RPC calls in sst importer.
- Import RPC Count: number of inflight RPC calls in sst importer.
- Import Write/Download RPC Duration: RPC time for write/download in sst importer.
- Import Wait Duration: time spent on downloading task waiting in queue for execution.
- Import Read SST Duration: time spent on reading from external storage of a file and download it to TiKV.
- Import Rewrite SST Duration: time spent on rewriting SST based on rewrite rules. 
- Import Ingest RPC Duration: time spent on handling ingest RPC request on TiKV.
- Import Ingest SST Duration: time spent on ingesting SST into RocksDB.
- Import Ingest SST Bytes: number of bytes ingested.
- Import Download SST Throughput: SST download throughput in bytes per second.

> - TTL Expired: number of expired items after TTL in backup files.

Reviewer 3: we can also skip this item since it's raw_kv related, and it's also needs to be filtered out from snapshot restore panel.

- cloud request: number of request to cloud providers. 

### Point-in-Time Restore

- CPU Usage: CPU utilization by PITR.
- P99 RPC Duration: 99 percentile of the RPC requests time.
- Import RPC Ops: number of total RPC calls in sst importer.

> - Import RPC Count: number of inflight RPC calls in sst importer.

Reviewer 2: maybe move those 2 up

Author: oh, actually they are in both sections since PITR needs to download snapshot first and then download logs. 

I have raised this to the team that whether we should have a unified restore API instead of snapshot & PITR, the PITR in my opinion is a superset of the snapshot.

- Initial Scanning Trigger Reason: The reason for triggering incremental scanning
- Region Checkpoint Key Putting: The number of checkpoint operations logged to the PD

### Snapshot restore 

- Import CPU Utilization: CPU utilization aggregated by sst importer.
- Import Thread Count: number of threads used by sst importer.
- Import Errors: error counts during sst import.
- Import RPC Duration: time spent for various RPC calls in sst importer.
- Import RPC Ops: number of total RPC calls in sst importer.
- Import RPC Count: number of inflight RPC calls in sst importer.
- Import Write/Download RPC Duration: RPC time for write/download in sst importer.
- Import Wait Duration: time spent on downloading task waiting in queue for execution.
- Import Read SST Duration: time spent on reading from external storage of a file and download it to TiKV.
- Import Rewrite SST Duration: time spent on rewriting SST based on rewrite rules. 

> - Import Ingest RPC Duration: time spent on sending ingest response in RPC call.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Import Ingest RPC Duration: time spent on handing ingest response in RPC call.
```

It is server-side.

Author: I see, just read the code again, you are right, the timer is started before the handling logic, I thought it was the time of sending response from server back to client.
The name of RPC duration is confusing to me actually. Normally it should measure the entire GRPC call end to end.
```
// client side
timer = Time();
server.sendGrpcRequest().await;
record(timer);
```
in our use case it is only measuring part of it on the server side. we should audit all those metrics and rename it properly.

- Import Ingest SST Duration: time spent on ingesting SST into RocksDB.
- Import Ingest SST Bytes: number of bytes ingested.
- Import Download SST Throughput: SST download throughput in bytes per second.

> - Import Local Write keys: ???

Author: anyone know what does local mean here?

Reviewer 4: This is used by tidb-lightning, which send a stream of sorted kv pairs (instead of a reference to a remote SST), and TiKV will use the `SstFileWriter` of RocksDB to generate a SST.

The two metrics collects how many key / bytes it has written.

Reviewer 3: I think we can skip this entry ?

Author: I see! thanks @YuJuncen 
yeah in that case it can be skipped

> - Import Local Write bytes: ???

Reviewer 3: and this?

Author: yeah I guess that raise the problem of mixing unrelated metrics. we shouldn't expect to see lightning related metrics in the backup&restore dashboard
https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/17369

- TTL Expired: number of expired items after TTL in backup files.
- cloud request: number of request to cloud providers. 

### Point-in-Time Restore

- CPU Usage: CPU utilization by PITR.
- P99 RPC Duration: 99 percentile of the RPC requests time.
- Import RPC Ops: number of total RPC calls in sst importer.
- Import RPC Count: number of inflight RPC calls in sst importer.
- Cache Events: number of events on file cache during sst import.
- Overall RPC Duration: time spent on RPC calls.
- Read File into Memory Duration: time spent on downloading files from external storage and loaded in to memory.
- Queuing Time: time spent on waiting to get scheduled on a thread.
- Apply Request Throughput: Apply request rate in bytes.
- Downloaded File Size: downloaded file size in bytes.
- Apply Batch Size: number of bytes for applying to raft engine in one batch. 
- Blocked by Concurrency Time: time spent on waiting to get executed due to concurrency constraint.  
- Apply Request Speed: speed of applying request to raft engine. 
- Cached File in Memory: files cached by the applying requests of importer.

> - Engine Requests Unfinished: number of pending requests to raft engine.

Reviewer 4: The "raft engine" should be "raft store", this "Engine" actually means the `Engine` trait (`RaftKv` class) in TiKV. "Raft Engine" specially means the storage of the raft state in TiKV.

- Import Ingest SST Bytes: The number of bytes ingested.
- Import Download SST Throughput: The SST download throughput in bytes per second.
- cloud request: The number of requests to cloud providers.

### Point In Time Restore

- CPU Usage: The CPU utilization by point-in-time recovery (PITR).
- P99 RPC Duration: The 99th percentile of RPC request time.
- Import RPC Ops: The total number of RPC calls in SST importer.
- Import RPC Count: The number of inf-light RPC calls in SST importer.
- Cache Events: The number of events on file cache during SST import.
- Overall RPC Duration: The time spent on RPC calls.
- Read File into Memory Duration: The time spent downloading files from external storage and loading them into memory.
- Queuing Time: The time spent waiting to be scheduled on a thread.
- Apply Request Throughput: The rate of applying requests in bytes.
- Downloaded File Size: The size of downloaded file in bytes.
- Apply Batch Size: The number of bytes for applying to Raft store in one batch.
- Blocked by Concurrency Time: The time spent waiting for execution due to concurrency constraints.
- Apply Request Speed: The speed of applying request to Raft store.

> - Cached File in Memory: The files cached by the applying requests of importer.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Cached File in Memory: The files cached by the applying requests of SST importer.
```

- Engine Requests Unfinished: The number of pending requests to Raft store.

> - Apply Time: The time spent writing data to the Raft store.

Reviewer 5: Both "the Raft store" and "Raft store" are used in this PR.

> - Apply Time: The time spent writing data to the Raft store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Apply Time: The time spent writing data to Raft store.
```
